



Network Working Group                                           S. Hegde
Internet-Draft                                             A. Przygienda
Intended status: Informational                                   Juniper
Expires: 6 January 2025                                        A. Lindem
                                                     LabN Consulting LLC
                                                             5 July 2024


               Improved OSPF Database Exchange Procedure
                  draft-hegde-lsr-ospf-better-idbx-02

Abstract

   When an OSPF router undergoes restart, previous instances of LSAs
   belonging to that router may remain in the databases of other routers
   in the OSPF domain until such LSAs are aged out.  Hence, when the
   restarting router joins the network again, neighboring routers re-
   establish adjacencies while the restarting router is still bringing-
   up its interfaces and adjacencies and generates LSAs with sequence
   numbers that may be lower than the stale LSAs.  Such stale LSAs may
   be interpreted as bi-directional connectivity before the initial
   database exchanges are finished and genuine bi-directional LSA
   connectivity exists.  Such incorrect interpretation may lead to,
   among other things, transient traffic packet drops.  This document
   suggests improvements in the OSPF database exchange process to
   prevent such problems due to stale LSA utilization.  The solution
   does not preclude changes in the existing standard but presents an
   extension that will prevent this scenario.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP
   14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.





Hegde, et al.            Expires 6 January 2025                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      draft-hegde-lsr-ospf-better-idbx           July 2024


   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 6 January 2025.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2024 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Solution  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     2.1.  OSPF Specification Additions and Modifications  . . . . .   4
     2.2.  Example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   3.  Management Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   4.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   6.  Contributors  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   7.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     7.1.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     7.2.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7

1.  Introduction

   When an OSPF [RFC2328] router restarts, its stale LSAs are left in
   the database of other routers in the OSPF domain until the LSAs are
   aged out either intentionally or by the LSA age elapsing.  The stale
   Router LSA can contain links to all the neighbors that had Full
   adjacencies before the router restarted.








Hegde, et al.            Expires 6 January 2025                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      draft-hegde-lsr-ospf-better-idbx           July 2024


                               ----------C--------
                               |                 |
                         A-----B                 E-----F
                               |                 |
                               --------D---------



                           Figure 1: OSPF Network

   Figure 1 shows a very simple OSPF network.  In case of C undergoing
   restart that does not generate purges, the other routers in the
   domain will hold the stale LSA of Router C in their database.  The
   stale LSA may have links to B and E, which represents the topology of
   C before it went down.  When C restarts again, it initiates the
   database exchange process with B and E.  B and E may have C's stale
   LSA with a higher sequence number in their database than the new ones
   originated by C and hence erroneously assume those being the newest
   copy, successively bringing up the adjacency with C, and
   transitioning to Full state.  Based on C's Stale LSA having LSA links
   to B and E, the Shortest Path First (SPF) back-link check is
   satisfied and B and E update their routing table to point to C.  This
   may cause C to drop this traffic as C may not have all its previous
   adjacencies up and all LSAs in place to correctly compute the
   necessary routes.  The situation corrects itself with C reissuing the
   LSAs with even higher sequence numbers over time so the condition is
   transient today already.

2.  Solution

   To prevent the transient condition described the database exchange
   procedure from [RFC2328] section 7.2 is extended with additional
   constraints to prevent an OSPF router from transitioning to Full
   state when it has stale LSAs originated by the database exchange
   neighbor in its Link State Database (LSDB).

   During an IDBX the router determined it should become adjacent with
   another OSPF router and for that purpose initially it enters the
   ExStart state and creates a "Database summary list" for the neighbor.
   In addition to this list a "Stale database exchange list" is created
   for such neighbor and is initially populated with LSAs in LSDB which
   were originated by it.  The neighbor will not transition to Full
   state until both the Link state request list and the Stale database
   exchange list are empty.  During the Database Exchange process
   entries are removed from the Stale database exchange list when the
   same or a more recent LSAs is referenced in a Database Description
   packet or the neighbor originates a more recent instance of the LSA,
   and it is received in a Link State Update packet.  For stale LSAs in



Hegde, et al.            Expires 6 January 2025                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      draft-hegde-lsr-ospf-better-idbx           July 2024


   the router's Link State Database, the neighbor will request stale
   LSAs and originate more recent instances via normal OSPF procedures
   as illustrated in Section 2.2.

2.1.  OSPF Specification Additions and Modifications

   The following additions and modifications to OSPF [RFC2328] are
   needed for this feature.  The application of the feature SHOULD be
   based on local configuration (refer to Section 3).

   1.  In section 10.3 "The Neighbor State Machine", State: ExStart,
       Event: NegotiationDone - The "Stale database exchange list" is
       created including LSAs with the "Advertising Router" set to the
       neighbor's Router ID.

   2.  In section 10.3 "The Neighbor State Machine", State: Exchange,
       Event: ExchangeDone - The new neighbor state will not be Full
       unless both the Link state request list and the Stale database
       exchange list are empty.

   3.  In section 10.3 "The Neighbor State Machine", State: Exchange or
       greater, Event: AdjOk? - If an adjacency will not be formed, the
       Stale database exchange list is also cleaned up.

   4.  In section 10.3 "The Neighbor State Machine", State: Any state,
       Event: KillNbr - The Stale database exchange list is also cleaned
       up.

   5.  In section 10.3 "The Neighbor State Machine", State: Any state,
       Event: LLDown - The Stale database exchange list is also cleaned
       up.

   6.  In section 10.3 "The Neighbor State Machine", State: Any state,
       Event: InactivityTimer - The Stale database exchange list is is
       also cleaned up.

   7.  In section 10.3 "The Neighbor State Machine", State: 2Way or
       greater, Event: 1-WayReceived - The Stale database exchange list
       is is also cleaned up.

   8.  In section 10.6 "Receiving Database Description Packets", If the
       Database Description packet is accepted, LSAs originated by the
       neighbor that are not less recent than the local database copy
       will be removed from the Stale database exchange list.  LSAs that
       are less recent than the local database copy will remain on th
       State database exchange list and will be updated by the neighbor
       through the Loading phase of the Database exchange process.




Hegde, et al.            Expires 6 January 2025                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      draft-hegde-lsr-ospf-better-idbx           July 2024


   9.  In section 13, "The Flooding Procedure", (5), (g): If the
       orignator of the more recent LSA is a neighbor that is in
       Exchange or Loading state, remove the LSA from the Stale database
       exchange list.  If the neighbor is in Loading state and both the
       List state request list and the Stale database exchange list are
       empty, the Loading Done event is generated.  In most cases, the
       LSA will have been received from the neighbor in Exchange or
       Loading state.  However, this cannot be guaranteed due to packet
       loss and different propagation delays.  Additionally, the
       neighbor may be in Exchange and Loading state on more than one
       interface.

2.2.  Example

   Figure 2 provides an example of C restarting having originated an LSA
   with sequence number Y before.  After restarting C originates the
   same LSA with sequence number X where X < Y since it is not aware of
   existence of version X yet.



                    C-----------------E
                                  Create Stale DB Exchange
                                   List

         DBD: LSA A origin:C  ------->
             Sequence:X
                                 DBD: LSA A Origin:C
                         <------       Sequence:Y
         LSReq LSA A,
         origin C       ----->
                               Modified Procedure

                        <------- LSA  A, Origin C, Seq:Y
         C re-originating self LSA
         LSA A, Origin C, -------> Remove Stale
         Seq:Y+1                   LSA A, Origin C
                                   From Stale DB Exchange
                                   list.

                                   Bring adjacency to Full state if
                                   both LS Request list and Stale DB
                                   Exchange list are empty.




               Figure 2: Modified Database Exchange Procedure



Hegde, et al.            Expires 6 January 2025                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft      draft-hegde-lsr-ospf-better-idbx           July 2024


   As shown in figure Figure 2 above, E originates LSReq with Sequence
   number X but waits until the LSA with sequence number Y+1 (or
   strictly speaking, an LSA that compares as newer to the one it holds)
   arrives.  As the LSA is still in the Stale DB Exchange List, the
   adjacency will remain in Loading state and will not move to Full
   state.  All the neighbors of the restarting routers hold the neighbor
   FSM in Loading state and do not transition to Full state until the
   stale LSA is replaced with the new LSA that is more recent than the
   stale LSA.  This ensures that other routers in the network do not
   compute a path through the restarting router since they cannot
   satisfy the bi-directionality condition in SPF computations.

3.  Management Considerations

   Application the Database exchange procedure specified in this
   documennt SHOULD be based on local configuration with the default
   behavior not to perform the addition Stale database exchange list
   processed specified in this document.  Not all OSPF networks require
   elimination of traffic drops during the Database exchange process (as
   evidenced by the fact that OSPF has been deployed for several decades
   without this added packet loss mitigation).  Additionally, optional
   configuration will encourage implementation and deployment.

4.  IANA Considerations

   No IANA Considerations

5.  Security Considerations


6.  Contributors


7.  References

7.1.  Informative References

7.2.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC2328]  Moy, J., "OSPF Version 2", STD 54, RFC 2328,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2328, April 1998,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2328>.




Hegde, et al.            Expires 6 January 2025                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft      draft-hegde-lsr-ospf-better-idbx           July 2024


   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>.

Authors' Addresses

   Shraddha Hegde
   Juniper
   India
   Email: shraddha@juniper.net


   Tony Przygienda
   Juniper
   1133 Innovation Way
   Sunnyvale, CA
   United States of America
   Email: prz@juniper.net


   Acee Lindem
   LabN Consulting LLC
   301 Midenhall Way
   Cary, North Carolina
   United States of America
   Email: acee.ietf@gmail.com

























Hegde, et al.            Expires 6 January 2025                 [Page 7]
